at his house’s outer gates and take his stand,
armed with his helmet, shield and pair of spears,
as strong as the man I glimpsed that first time
in our own house, drinking wine and reveling there …
just come in from Ephyra, visiting Ilus, Mermerus’ son.
Odysseus sailed that way, you see, in his swift trim ship,
hunting deadly poison to smear on his arrows’ bronze heads.
Ilus refused—he feared the wrath of the everlasting gods—
but father, so fond of him, gave him all he wanted.
If only that Odysseus sported with these suitors,
a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot!
True, but all lies in the lap of the great gods,
whether or not he’ll come and pay them back,
here, in his own house.
But you, I urge you,think how to drive these suitors from your halls.
Come now, listen closely. Take my words to heart.
At daybreak summon the island’s lords to full assembly,
give your orders to all and call the gods to witness:
tell the suitors to scatter, each to his own place.
As for your mother, if the spirit moves her to marry,
let her go back to her father’s house, a man of power.
Her kin will arrange the wedding, provide the gifts,
the array that goes with a daughter dearly loved.
For you,I have some good advice, if only you will accept it.
Fit out a ship with twenty oars, the best in sight,
sail in quest of news of your long-lost father.
Someone may tell you something
or you may catch a rumor straight from Zeus,
rumor that carries news to men like nothing else.
First go down to Pylos, question old King Nestor,
then cross over to Sparta, to red-haired Menelaus,
of all the bronze-armored Achaeans the last man back.
Now, if you hear your father’s alive and heading home,
hard-pressed as you are, brave out one more year.
If you hear he’s dead, no longer among the living,
then back you come to the native land you love.
raise his grave-mound, build his honors high
with the full funeral rites that he deserves—
and give your mother to another husband.
Then,once you’ve sealed those matters, seen them through,
think hard, reach down deep in your heart and soul
for a way to kill these suitors in your house,
by stealth or in open combat.
You must not cling to your boyhood any longer—
it’s time you were a man. Haven’t you heard
what glory Prince Orestes won throughout the world
when he killed that cunning, murderous Aegisthus,
who’d killed his famous father?
And you, my friend—how tall and handsome I see you now—be brave, you too,
so men to come will sing your praises down the years.
But now I must go back to my swift trim ship
and all my shipmates, chafing there, I’m sure,
waiting for my return. It all rests with you.
Take my words to heart.”
“Oh stranger,”heedful Telemachus replied, “indeed I will.
You’ve counseled me with so much kindness now,
like a father to a son. I won’t forget a word.
But come, stay longer, keen as you are to sail,
so you can bathe and rest and lift your spirits,
then go back to your ship, delighted with a gift,
a prize of honor, something rare and fine
as a keepsake from myself. The kind of gift
a host will give a stranger, friend to friend.”
Her eyes glinting, Pallas declined in haste:
“Not now. Don’t hold me here. I long to be on my way.
As for the gift—whatever you’d give in kindness—
save it for my return so I can take it home.
Choose something rare and fine, and a good reward
that gift is going to bring you.” 